README.md, before:

# datastore-specifications
Specifications for directory naming, file naming, file contents in the LIS datastore

Any of the file-containing directories can contain a README file and a CHANGES file.

## README YAML files
Every file-containing directory, AKA "collection", in the LIS datastore should contain a README file in YAML format. 

Filename: [README.[collection].yml](README.collection.yml)

Examples:
- [README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/genomes/IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW/README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW.yml)
- [README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/annotations/IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D/README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D.yml)
- [README.CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/genetic/CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014/README.CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014.yml)

### Validation
The basic README structure (acceptable field names, strings vs. lists vs. dates) can be validated using the following command:
```
pajv -s readme.schema.json -d README.[collection].yml --all-errors --coerce-types=array --remove-additional=all --changes
```
using the JSON schema definition [readme.schema.json](/readme.schema.json).

*This schema must be kept up to date along with the sample template [README.collection.yml](/README.collection.yml) when any changes are made to the README spec.*

### Content requirements
READMEs must be YAML-compliant, which means they pass the test on http://www.yamllint.com/ or using the `yamllint` command-line utility. Here are some, but not all, requirements for a valid LIS README:
- `identifier` at the top repeats the name of the collection, i.e. the name of the containing directory.
- `synopsis` should be short, 100 characters or less.
- `genotype` is a YAML array: but use a single "strain1 x strain2" value for bi-parental crosses.
- DOIs are DOIs, not URLs (e.g. 10.1534/g3.118.200521).
- Dates are in the format 2020-03-23.
- Use spaces, not tabs (*tabs may not appear anywhere in a YAML*)
- Enclose values in quotes when they contain a colon or quotes (you can use single or double quotes to distinguish from quotes in content)
- Leave missing values blank - do not use "N/A" or "none" or anything else.

## CHANGES files
A directory may contain a CHANGES.*collection*.txt file which lists file transformations and changes. For example:

```
file transformations:

seqlen.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.cds.fa | perl -pe 's/(\w+\.\w+)\.(\d+) (\d+)/$1\t$2\t$3/' | sort -k1,1 -k3nr,3nr | top_line.awk | awk '{print ">" $1 "." $2}' | sort > tmp.longest"

fasta_to_zero_lines.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.cds.fa | sort > tmp.fa.1ln

join tmp.longest tmp.fa.1ln | perl -pe 's/ zqz /\n/' > vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1.3Nz5c.cds_primaryTranscript.fna

seqlen.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.peptide.fa | perl -pe 's/(\w+\.\w+)\.(\d+) (\d+)/$1\t$2\t$3/' | sort -k1,1 -k3nr,3nr | top_line.awk | awk '{print ">" $1 "." $2}' | sort > tmp.longest

fasta_to_zero_lines.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.peptide.fa | sort > tmp.fa.1ln

join tmp.longest tmp.fa.1ln | perl -pe 's/ zqz /\n/' > vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1.3Nz5f.protein_primaryTranscript.faa

changes: 

2018-03-03 Added MANIFEST files
2018-09-15 Changed fastas to include full prefixing (s/vigan/vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1/)
```

Commit message:

Added Gotchas sections
There are some subtle README requirements that I'll add under Gotchas. The first is this one about publication.title matching between the genome assembly README and the corresponding annotations README. (I'm not sure it's worth trying to code a validator on that, it's easy enough to fix it after the mine loader screams.)

README.md, after:

# datastore-specifications
Specifications for directory naming, file naming, file contents in the LIS datastore

Any of the file-containing directories can contain a README file and a CHANGES file.

## README YAML files
Every file-containing directory, AKA "collection", in the LIS datastore should contain a README file in YAML format. 

Filename: [README.[collection].yml](README.collection.yml)

Examples:
- [README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/genomes/IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW/README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.QnBW.yml)
- [README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/annotations/IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D/README.IT97K-499-35.gnm1.ann1.zb5D.yml)
- [README.CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014.yml](https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Vigna/unguiculata/genetic/CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014/README.CB27_x_IT82E-18.gen.Pottorff_Li_2014.yml)

### Validation
The basic README structure (acceptable field names, strings vs. lists vs. dates) can be validated using the following command:
```
pajv -s readme.schema.json -d README.[collection].yml --all-errors --coerce-types=array --remove-additional=all --changes
```
using the JSON schema definition [readme.schema.json](/readme.schema.json).

*This schema must be kept up to date along with the sample template [README.collection.yml](/README.collection.yml) when any changes are made to the README spec.*

### Content requirements
READMEs must be YAML-compliant, which means they pass the test on http://www.yamllint.com/ or using the `yamllint` command-line utility. Here are some, but not all, requirements for a valid LIS README:
- `identifier` at the top repeats the name of the collection, i.e. the name of the containing directory.
- `synopsis` should be short, 100 characters or less.
- `genotype` is a YAML array: but use a single "strain1 x strain2" value for bi-parental crosses.
- DOIs are DOIs, not URLs (e.g. 10.1534/g3.118.200521).
- Dates are in the format 2020-03-23.
- Use spaces, not tabs (*tabs may not appear anywhere in a YAML*)
- Enclose values in quotes when they contain a colon or quotes (you can use single or double quotes to distinguish from quotes in content)
- Leave missing values blank - do not use "N/A" or "none" or anything else.

### Gotchas
- **READMEs may share content.** For example, the README with a genome assembly (under /genomes/) often contains the same publication as the README
with annotations (under /annotations/). _Those publications must match exactly._ Otherwise, the mine loader will error out with an error like "Conflicting values for field Publication.title between Zh13.gnm2.LV9P (value "Update soybean Zhonghuang 13 genome to a golden reference. Sci China" in database with ID 99000176) and Zh13.gnm2.ann1.FJ3G.cds (value "Update soybean Zhonghuang 13 genome to a golden reference" being stored)."

## CHANGES files
A directory may contain a CHANGES.*collection*.txt file which lists file transformations and changes. For example:

```
file transformations:

seqlen.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.cds.fa | perl -pe 's/(\w+\.\w+)\.(\d+) (\d+)/$1\t$2\t$3/' | sort -k1,1 -k3nr,3nr | top_line.awk | awk '{print ">" $1 "." $2}' | sort > tmp.longest"

fasta_to_zero_lines.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.cds.fa | sort > tmp.fa.1ln

join tmp.longest tmp.fa.1ln | perl -pe 's/ zqz /\n/' > vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1.3Nz5c.cds_primaryTranscript.fna

seqlen.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.peptide.fa | perl -pe 's/(\w+\.\w+)\.(\d+) (\d+)/$1\t$2\t$3/' | sort -k1,1 -k3nr,3nr | top_line.awk | awk '{print ">" $1 "." $2}' | sort > tmp.longest

fasta_to_zero_lines.awk vigan.Gyeongwon.a3.v1.peptide.fa | sort > tmp.fa.1ln

join tmp.longest tmp.fa.1ln | perl -pe 's/ zqz /\n/' > vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1.3Nz5f.protein_primaryTranscript.faa

changes: 

2018-03-03 Added MANIFEST files
2018-09-15 Changed fastas to include full prefixing (s/vigan/vigan.Gyeongwon.gnm3.ann1/)
```
