# General protocols: procedures for adding new data, etc.
Instructions for adding data to the Data Store. General protocols.

## PROCEDURE FOR ADDING A NEW DATA SET TO THE DATA STORE

NOTE: The instructions below are for curators working on any instance of
LegFed Data Store - at e.g. soybase.org, peanutbase.org, legumeinfo.org etc. 
If you are a researcher or user of and you have a data set that you would like
to contribute, PLEASE <a href="https://legumeinfo.org/contact">CONTACT US!</a> 
We would love to work with you. You are welcome to use the templates in this 
directory and begin preparing your data for submission, but the final uploading
will need to be done by curators with the affiliated database projects.


### Upload the data to the local Data Store file system
The data store is accessible via command line from several servers.
As of summer, 2021, any of these servers can be used:
  - lis-stage.usda.iastate.edu 
  - soybase-stage.usda.iastate.edu 
  - legumefederation.usda.iastate.edu 
  - peanutbase-stage.usda.iastate.edu

Upload (scp) data to the private directory (and appropriate subdirectory) here:
  /usr/local/www/data/private/
  e.g.
  /usr/local/www/data/private/Glycine/max

### Name the directories and files
Apply directory names, following the patterns described in specifications in this repository. 
  
### Fill out the README and MANIFEST files
Fill out the README file. The empty template is at 
https://legumeinfo.org/data/about_the_data_store/templates
but it is often easiest to copy a README from another data collection for the 
same species and then change the fields that need to be changed.

```
  cp /usr/local/www/data/v2/Glycine/max/Wm82.gnm2.ann1.RVB6/README.RVB6.yml .
  mv README.RVB6.yml README.K8RT.yml
  perl -pi -e 's/RVB6/K8RT/' README.K8RT.yml
```

Note that the README and MANIFEST files are in yml format. See a basic description:
https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/YAMLSyntax.html
or the full yml specification here (this is overkill for our purposes):
at http://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html#id2781553
We use just a few of the yml features - basically, ...
Start the file with three dashes.
Use the "key : value pattern", for records with a single element - 
or the list form, in which all members of a list are lines beginning at the same 
indentation level starting with a "- " (a dash and a space).

Fill out the MANIFEST files.
```
  cp /usr/local/www/data/about_the_data_store/templates/template__M* .
  rename 's/template__//' tem*
  rename 's/KEY/K8RT/' *KEY*
```

### Calculate the CHECKSUMs <a name="checksums"></a>
Note the -r flag for the md5 command.
```
  KEY=K8RT
  rm CHECKSUM*
  md5 -r * > CHECKSUM.$KEY.md5
```

### Move the collection from v2 to private
Move the directory from from v2 to private, e.g.
```
  DIR=MY_NEW_DIRECTORY
  mv /usr/local/www/data/private/Glycine/max/$DIR /usr/local/www/data/v2/Glycine/max/$DIR
```
Also, note the change in the status file in the private/Genus/species/ dir, e.g. 
```
  echo $'\n'"Moved Wm82.gnm2.met1.K8RT to v2 on 2018-04-19 by YOUR NAME"$'\n' \
    >> private/Glycine/max/status.glyma.txt
```

### Update the html header file for the set of collections for this species
Each outer-level directory has a summary of the data in each collection at the top of the
page, e.g. https://legumeinfo.org/data/v2/Glycine/max/genomes
This summary is generated by the script "summarize_metadata_spp.sh" at /usr/local/www/data/about_the_data_store/scripts/. 
This script generates the "_h5ai.header.html" file, pulling brief descriptions from the "synopsis" field in the README 
for each collection. Call the script like so, passing it two paramters: Genus and species:
```
  summarize_metadata_spp.sh Glycine max
```
