PROTOCOLS/gene_functions/README.md, before:

# Protocols for adding gene function information to the gene_functions collections.

## General approach, philosophy, and objectives

While all genes in a genome presumably have functions, many of those functions are either vital such that mutations are lethal or detrimental; or cryptic due to redundancy or activation in unusual environmental or developmental conditions. It may be that a relatively small number of genes have clear causal relationships with traits of agronomic interest -- genes for which natural variation has been selected upon during crop domestication and improvement. Such genes would include modifiers of flowering time, seed size or color or shape, plant architecture, disease resistance, reduction of dormancy, loss of pod shatter, etc. These types of genes are the ones that are the focus of gene-function curation in the Data Store.

The focus is genes for which phenotypes have been observed for known mutants. In general, reports that are simply bioinformatic characterizations of gene families should be AVOIDED for the purpose of the gene-function collections here - as should other high-throughput experiments that report expression responses, gene interaction networks, etc.

The curation approach has been designed to be relatively efficient and non-cumbersome for the curator - in the sense that limited information is required, and some portions of the process are aided by scripts.

## File and path specifications
The file and directory-path specifications are given in the README file in two locations (eventually probably destined to be merged):
  - [datastore-specifications](https://github.com/legumeinfo/datastore-specifications/tree/main/Genus/species/gene_functions).
  - [gene-function-registry](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry)

## Workflows
Since we have several curators, with varying levels of experience, new gene function records (yaml documents) should be reviewed before they are incorporated into the main datastore. The workspace for drafting and reviewing the records is at the [gene-function-registry](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry), with the yaml documents going into the respective Genus/species directories. The work should begin in a curator's "work-in-progress" (wip) directory. For example, here is Steven's Glycine/max [wip directory](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry/tree/main/Glycine/max/wip_steven).

When starting to curate a manuscript, the manuscript should be selected from (or added to) the Google Docs [tracking spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1iDdaIQNqK8jvkyQZHATSC1gI-FVhlKv5xde4yPR-Rzs/edit), and then note in the spreadsheet the status, i.e., Steven would note "wip_steven" in the second column (doc status). When ready to review, he would note the date in "to review". The date would be noted when the review is completed, and also when it is incorporated into the datastore.

As we are just working out new curation protocols (as of mid-2023), it is likely that the curation protocol and practices will evolve, as we figure out how to streamline the process and make it more robust. It is likely that different curators will have somewhat different practices. What matters is the quality and uniformity of the final product.

## Accessing manuscripts
Most publications that we work on will be available in [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and [PubMedCentral](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/). Additionally, [PubAg](https://pubag.nal.usda.gov), maintained by the USDA, holds some documents that are not in PubMed or PubMedCentral.

Both the PubMed and PubMedCentral "libraries" are managed by the National Library of Medicine, but they have different characteristics. PubMed holds references to many more manuscripts than PubMedCentral, but only the abstracts. PubMedCentral holds fewer manuscripts, but provides the full text and content of the manuscripts. Thus, PubMed should generally be the starting point when working on a new manuscript. This will link to the full text if available in PubMedCentral - or otherwise in the source journal.

An important tool at PubMed is the "\" Cite" button. This returns a citation (by default, in NLM format, which we will use), that can be copied into the clipboard. This contains the essential information for referencing an article: authors, title, journal, year, DOI, PMID, and PMCID (if available).

An example of an abstract at PubMed is this one: [Ma, Xia, et al., 2019](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30740122/). Note that the PMID is a numeric string (30740122), the PMCID is a numeric string prefixed by PMC (PMC6357947), and the DOI is a dot- and slash-separated string, always beginning "10." (10.3389/fpls.2018.01979).

It is up to the curator how to interact with a publication that they are working on. In some cases, dealing with it online may be sufficient. In other cases, it may be helpful to download it and work on it locally - or to load it into Zotero. This aspect of the curatorial workflow is still to be determined, but will probably vary somewhat by curator's preference - and by consensus of curators who are working together.

## Requirements
The primary requirements are that the "gensp.traits.yml" files in the datastore be correct and in valid format. The curatorial process leading up to this point may vary, and is not a "requirement" per se. The reason that the ".traits.yml" are crucial is that these will be loaded into InterMine instances, so they are the main source files. The two other files in the gene_functions collections, gensp.citations.txt and gensp.references.txt, are derived programmatically from the gensp.traits.yml files.

Before new yaml records/documents are added to these files (a record or document holding the information about a single gene), they should be checked for valid yaml format - for example, in the [yamllint validator](https://www.yamllint.com). A validator will also be added to the Data Store for this file type (XX to be done).

## Working on gene function documents in GitHub

Clone (or update/refresh) a copy of the gene-function-registry:
```
    git clone https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry.git
    cd gene-function-registry
```

Or update/refresh an existing copy:
```
    cd gene-function-registry
    git status
    git fetch
    git pull
```

Copy the template to start a new yaml document. Though this will eventually be added to a single yaml file that contains multiple yaml "documents" (one per gene or locus), it is probably easier and safer to work on a single isolated yaml file per gene. 

The temporary/working file should be named in a consistent way (though recognizing that it will be incorporated into the combined document). A good practice is: Author_Author_YEAR.yml
```  
    cp templates/gensp.traits.yml Glycine/max/gene_functions/Chiasson_Loughlin_2014.yml
```

When done, push the file back to the repository (not the datastore proper, but https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry.git).
```
    git status
    git add Glycine/max/gene_functions/Chiasson_Loughlin_2014.yml
    git commit -m "Added Glycine max Chiasson_Loughlin_2014 for review."
    git push
```

Commit message:

Add link to yaml guide, and explain relationship between docs at gene-function-registry and at datastore-specifications.

PROTOCOLS/gene_functions/README.md, after:

# Protocols for adding gene function information to the gene_functions collections.

## General approach, philosophy, and objectives

While all genes in a genome presumably have functions, many of those functions are either vital such that mutations are lethal or detrimental; or cryptic due to redundancy or activation in unusual environmental or developmental conditions. It may be that a relatively small number of genes have clear causal relationships with traits of agronomic interest -- genes for which natural variation has been selected upon during crop domestication and improvement. Such genes would include modifiers of flowering time, seed size or color or shape, plant architecture, disease resistance, reduction of dormancy, loss of pod shatter, etc. These types of genes are the ones that are the focus of gene-function curation in the Data Store.

The focus is genes for which phenotypes have been observed for known mutants. In general, reports that are simply bioinformatic characterizations of gene families should be AVOIDED for the purpose of the gene-function collections here - as should other high-throughput experiments that report expression responses, gene interaction networks, etc.

The curation approach has been designed to be relatively efficient and non-cumbersome for the curator - in the sense that limited information is required, and some portions of the process are aided by scripts.

## File and path specifications
The file and directory-path specifications are given in the README file in two locations:
  - [datastore-specifications](https://github.com/legumeinfo/datastore-specifications/tree/main/Genus/species/gene_functions)
  - [gene-function-registry](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry)
The reason for the dupliction is the files will be prepared and reviewed away from the main Data Store. Specifications and protocols (this document) are in datastore-specifications, and the work-in-progress is at the gene-function-registry. After review and revision if needed, new gene records (as yaml documents) will be added to the appropriate gensp.traits.yml file in the Data Store. Draft curation work will go into the [gene-function-registry](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry) repository, and then go into the Data Store file system -- and from there, into the [datastore-metadata](https://github.com/legumeinfo/datastore-metadata) repository.

## Workflows
Since we have several curators, with varying levels of experience, new gene function records (yaml documents) should be reviewed before they are incorporated into the main datastore. The workspace for drafting and reviewing the records is at the [gene-function-registry](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry), with the yaml documents going into the respective Genus/species directories. The work should begin in a curator's "work-in-progress" (wip) directory. For example, here is Steven's Glycine/max [wip directory](https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry/tree/main/Glycine/max/wip_steven).

When starting to curate a manuscript, the manuscript should be selected from (or added to) the Google Docs [tracking spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1iDdaIQNqK8jvkyQZHATSC1gI-FVhlKv5xde4yPR-Rzs/edit), and then note in the spreadsheet the status, i.e., Steven would note "wip_steven" in the second column (doc status). When ready to review, he would note the date in "to review". The date would be noted when the review is completed, and also when it is incorporated into the datastore.

As we are just working out new curation protocols (as of mid-2023), it is likely that the curation protocol and practices will evolve, as we figure out how to streamline the process and make it more robust. It is likely that different curators will have somewhat different practices. What matters is the quality and uniformity of the final product.

## Accessing manuscripts
Most publications that we work on will be available in [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and [PubMedCentral](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/). Additionally, [PubAg](https://pubag.nal.usda.gov), maintained by the USDA, holds some documents that are not in PubMed or PubMedCentral.

Both the PubMed and PubMedCentral "libraries" are managed by the National Library of Medicine, but they have different characteristics. PubMed holds references to many more manuscripts than PubMedCentral, but only the abstracts. PubMedCentral holds fewer manuscripts, but provides the full text and content of the manuscripts. Thus, PubMed should generally be the starting point when working on a new manuscript. This will link to the full text if available in PubMedCentral - or otherwise in the source journal.

An important tool at PubMed is the "\" Cite" button. This returns a citation (by default, in NLM format, which we will use), that can be copied into the clipboard. This contains the essential information for referencing an article: authors, title, journal, year, DOI, PMID, and PMCID (if available).

An example of an abstract at PubMed is this one: [Ma, Xia, et al., 2019](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30740122/). Note that the PMID is a numeric string (30740122), the PMCID is a numeric string prefixed by PMC (PMC6357947), and the DOI is a dot- and slash-separated string, always beginning "10." (10.3389/fpls.2018.01979).

It is up to the curator how to interact with a publication that they are working on. In some cases, dealing with it online may be sufficient. In other cases, it may be helpful to download it and work on it locally - or to load it into Zotero. This aspect of the curatorial workflow is still to be determined, but will probably vary somewhat by curator's preference - and by consensus of curators who are working together.

## Requirements
The primary requirements are that the "gensp.traits.yml" files in the datastore be correct and in valid format. The curatorial process leading up to this point may vary, and is not a "requirement" per se. The reason that the ".traits.yml" are crucial is that these will be loaded into InterMine instances, so they are the main source files. The two other files in the gene_functions collections, gensp.citations.txt and gensp.references.txt, are derived programmatically from the gensp.traits.yml files.

Here is a good brief guide to the [yaml format](https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/yaml/).

Before new yaml records/documents are added to these files (a record or document holding the information about a single gene), they should be checked for valid yaml format - for example, in the [yamllint validator](https://www.yamllint.com). A validator will also be added to the Data Store for this file type (XX to be done).

## Working on gene function documents in GitHub

Clone (or update/refresh) a copy of the gene-function-registry:
```
    git clone https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry.git
    cd gene-function-registry
```

Or update/refresh an existing copy:
```
    cd gene-function-registry
    git status
    git fetch
    git pull
```

Copy the template to start a new yaml document. Though this will eventually be added to a single yaml file that contains multiple yaml "documents" (one per gene or locus), it is probably easier and safer to work on a single isolated yaml file per gene. 

The temporary/working file should be named in a consistent way (though recognizing that it will be incorporated into the combined document). A good practice is: Author_Author_YEAR.yml
```  
    cp templates/gensp.traits.yml Glycine/max/gene_functions/Chiasson_Loughlin_2014.yml
```

When done, push the file back to the repository (not the datastore proper, but https://github.com/legumeinfo/gene-function-registry.git).
```
    git status
    git add Glycine/max/gene_functions/Chiasson_Loughlin_2014.yml
    git commit -m "Added Glycine max Chiasson_Loughlin_2014 for review."
    git push
```
